We've already seen line
plots a couple times, but
they looked a lot like scatter plots.
A line plot is created
with the plot function.
And plots a number of different
series of data points.
Connecting each series
in a point with a line.
Let's jump right in.
We can use numpy to use a linear series
of data points one through eight.
We'll also create a number of
quadratically increasing values as
the second series.
Remember that you can use broadcasting
in numpy to do this efficiently.
Here we can plot this, and this time
I'll use the mini formatting language,
task map plot lib,
to draw lines between data points.
We'll see the result as a two data series,
the linear one at the bottom and
the quadratic one at the top.
Both are using dots because
we use the -o flag.
So there are a couple of things which are
new about this versus the scatter plots.
First, we only gave y-axes values
to our plot call, no x axes values.
Instead, the plot function was smart
enough to figure out that what we
wanted was to use the index
of the series as the x value.
Which is pretty handy when
you want to make quick plots.
Second we see that the plot identifies
this as two series of data and that
the colors of the data from the series are
different including the data points and
the lines between the data points.
This is different from the scatter
plot which required us to label
the lines directly.
Like all good Python libraries matplotlib
invents a string based mini language for
commonly used formatting.
For instance, we could use an s inside of
the formatting string which would plot
another point using a square marker.
Or we could use a series of dashes and
dots to identify that a line
should be dashed instead of solid.
Here, let's plot another series.
We can use the regular axes functions
creating labels for the axes and for
the figure as a whole.
And we can create a legend too.
But note that since we didn't label
the data points as we did with the scatter
plot, we need to create legend
entries when we add the legend itself.
This is a good time to introduce
the fill between function of matplotlib.
Now this function isn't specific to line
plots, but you can see it commonly used
with these plots, so
I'll introduce it in this context.
Let's imagine that we want to highlight
the difference between the green and
the blue curves.
We could tell the access to paint
a color between these series
using the fill between function.
First we get the current axes object,
then we indicate the range of
x values we want to be filled.
We didn't specify any x values
in our call to plot, so
we'll just use the same range of
data points it's already using.
Then we'll put in our lower bounds and our
upper bounds along with the color we want
painted and for
fun I'll include a transparency value.
And that's all there is to it.
This is a great way to show, for instance,
the standard deviation of results or
error bars.
More likely you'll have
a series of x values and
y values which you're looking to plot.
Often with line plots this comes in
the form of date time on the x axes.
Let's change our x axis to a series
of eight date time instances in
one day intervals.
Let's first create a new image.
Then the NumPy arrange function which
you saw previously is really helpful at
sampling some dates for us.
We can ask for
an arrangement of dates at daily intervals
just by providing the start and end dates.
We can now replot our linear and
exponential data against
this set of dates.
That didn't seem to get us the effect
that we were interested in.
This is unfortunately one of the great
pain points in data science in Python,
date time handling.
The standard library does it in
two different ways, while NumPy,
which is used for scientific computing,
does it a third way.
In fact, there's probably a dozen
replacement libraries for
date times in Python.
The solution I'm going to use here comes
from a helper library in Pandas called
to datetime.
This specifically converts NumPy
dates into standard library dates
which is what matplotlib is expecting.
Let's first import Pandas
then create a new figure.
And let's arrange our set of dates
as per the previous code block.
Now I could iterate through the list,
converting them.
But instead I'll use the map
function of the standard library.
Which will apply the Pandas to datetime
against each of the elements in
observation_dates, and return the result.
Now let's
plot that
result.
That resulted in error.
It's a pretty confusing one at that.
You see, the problem is the map
function returns an iterator.
Matplotlib can't handle the iterator, so
we need to convert it to a list first.
This is really easy to do, but I wanted
to demonstrate some of the real-world
problems you can run into when you're
looking to build plots in Python.
And why it's important to understand,
not only the toolkit, but
how the language works.
Here's a quick fix.
We can convert the map result to a list,
but
keep in mind this isn't a very
memory-efficient way of handling the data.
This produces a pretty decent looking
figure with the data we want.
But the dates overlap pretty heavily.
Now, there's a couple of
things that we could do here.
For instance, everything is from 2017.
So we could iterate through and
change the labels by stripping the year.
And add an x axis label which clarifies
that it's all for the year of 2017.
This is pretty reasonable, but
I wanted to show you a couple of
features of how matplotlib uses text.
First we can get a single axis using
the x-axis or y-axis properties of
the axes object which we can get,
remember, with GCA or get current axis.
There are lots of interesting
properties of the axes object and
you use some them in the assignment.
For instance; you can get the grid lines,
the tick locations for
both major and minor ticks and so on.
Just like all artists, an axes has a bunch
of children which are themselves artists.
In fact, if you're are following along in
the Jupiter notebook with this lecture
why don't you just pause the video.
And run the wreck_gc function we
wrote earlier to explore what kind of
artists the x axes object
actually contains.
What I want to show you though,
is that you can access the text of the
tics using the get tick labels function.
Each of the tick labels are a text
object which itself is an artist.
This means that you can use a number
of different artist functions.
One specific to text is
the set rotation function
which changes the rotation
based on degrees.
Let's iterate through the axis labels and
change that.
The text is a bit hard to read
because it just runs off the image.
So you can adjust the subplot.
And there we go,
wonderfully readable dates in matplotlib.
And when we're talking of text
let me share one more insight.
Matplotlib has a fairly strong connection
to LaTeX a type setting language
used by mathematicians and scientists.
This means that you can use a subset
of LaTeX directly in your labels then
matplotlib will render them as
equations Here, for instance,
we can set the title of the axes so
that there's an x squared directly in it.
We do this by escaping to LaTeX
math mode with dollar signs.
Note that this works regardless of
whether you have LaTeX installed.
But with a full LaTeX installation,
you have significant control
over text formatting.
Okay, that wraps up line plots.
In the next lecture, we'll dive in to
bar charts and I'll see you there.